# Satellites are providing insights into agricultural production, crop conditions, and food supply <!--{ as="img" mode="hero" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eurodatacube/eodash/master/app/public/data/story-images/Agriculture.jpeg" }-->
### Read more about satellite data applications for environmental impacts on world cereal supply and demand <!--{ style="font-size:1.5rem;opacity:0.7;margin-top:1rem;" }-->

## Satellite data applications for environmental impacts on world crop (cereal) supply and demand
 
**Advances in satellite monitoring** deliver a treasure-trove of data that scientists study and analyze for the betterment of humankind. These discoveries can help identify trends that better predict occurrences such as climate change and global warming. Since 2020, researchers at the European Space Agency, (ESA), the Japanese Space Agency, (JAXA), and NASA have been working together on a joint dashboard to combine their satellite data and openly share findings in an effort to elevate and protect the quality of life for the global population.

Providing insight into agricultural production, crop conditions, and food supply are among some of the most impactful information afforded by Earth observing satellites. Information derived from the data retrieved can affect the price we pay at grocery stores, policy implementation from regional to global scales, and food security around the world. Not only can satellite data tell us about current and near-future food and commodity crop conditions, but researchers are also studying the long-term trends in climate change and its effects on our food supply in support of agricultural resilience.

As demonstrated by recent global crises including the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing Russian war in Ukraine, the globally interconnected nature of the agrifood system has been thrust into the spotlight. These extreme disruptions to the global food supply underscore the importance of global agriculture monitoring, both of major producing countries and those who are major importers and therefore most vulnerable to food insecurity. A key example of international coordination in support of better food information is the **G20 GEOGLAM Crop Monitor** developed in response to a request from the G20 Agricultural Market Information System (AMIS). The Crop Monitor provides a public good of open, timely, science-driven information on crop conditions in support of market transparency. The GEOGLAM Crop Monitor Initiative are supported by the [global agriculture community](https://cropmonitor.org/index.php/about/amis-partners-cm/) and national space agencies - including the NASA Harvest Consortium and US-based institutions, JAXA and JASMIN, ESA and several European institutions, ministries of agriculture across the globe and many more. It reflects an international, multi-source, consensus assessment of crop growing conditions, status, and agro-climatic factors likely to impact global production, focusing on the major producing and trading countries for the four primary crops monitored by AMIS (wheat, maize, rice, and soybean) as well as on the countries most at risk to food insecurity and their primary staple crops.

## Map Example <!--{as="eox-map" style="width: 100%; height: 500px;" layers='[{"type":"Tile","properties":{"id":"Overlay labels"},"source":{"type":"XYZ","urls":["//s2maps-tiles.eu/wmts/1.0.0/overlay_base_bright_3857/default/g/{z}/{y}/{x}.jpg"]}},{"type":"Vector","properties":{"id":"Administrative zones ADM0"},"source":{"type":"Vector"}},{"type":"Tile","properties":{"id":"N6_geoglam-2025-01-01T00:00:00Z"},"source":{"type":"XYZ","urls":["https://openveda.cloud/api/raster/cog/tiles/WebMercatorQuad/{z}/{x}/{y}?resampling_method=nearest&bidx=1&colormap=%7B%221%22%3A%20%5B120%2C%20120%2C%20120%2C%20255%5D%2C%222%22%3A%20%5B130%2C%2065%2C%200%2C%20255%5D%2C%223%22%3A%20%5B66%2C%20207%2C%2056%2C%20255%5D%2C%224%22%3A%20%5B245%2C%20239%2C%200%2C%20255%5D%2C%225%22%3A%20%5B241%2C%2089%2C%2032%2C%20255%5D%2C%226%22%3A%20%5B168%2C%200%2C%200%2C%20255%5D%2C%227%22%3A%20%5B0%2C%20143%2C%20201%2C%20255%5D%7D&url=s3://veda-data-store/geoglam/CropMonitor_202501.tif"]}},{"type":"Tile","properties":{"id":"Terrain light"},"source":{"type":"XYZ","urls":["//s2maps-tiles.eu/wmts/1.0.0/terrain-light_3857/default/g/{z}/{y}/{x}.jpg"]}}]' zoom="3.1699250014423126" center=[16.790831657981713,22.201786861954943] }-->

## Why We Monitor Agricultural Production

Any extreme event such as conflict, severe weather, or environmental abnormalities pose threats to agricultural production and may shock the system which is why it is so critical to have them accessible, transparent, timely, and global information afforded by satellite data. For example, based on community consensus and available satellite data we understand that at the end of February 2022, conditions are generally favourable for wheat and rice production, while mixed for maize and soybeans. We also know that winter wheat is mostly dormant in the northern hemisphere, with some areas of production raising some concern in Europe, Ukraine, and the US. In the southern hemisphere, maize is under mixed conditions in Argentina and southern Brazil. While rice conditions are favourable in most countries except for Vietnam and Brazil, soybeans are under mixed conditions in Argentina and southern Brazil. Satellite data helps us monitor these global crop conditions on a regular basis, especially in times and places where ground access is dangerous or limited.

**GEOGLAM Crop Monitor for AMIS and Early Warning synthesis map showing where crops are grown around the world, and the current crop conditions as of April 28, 2022. (source: <https://cropmonitor.org/>)**


